<h3>Estimation of the levels of recurrence when purely driven by chance</h3>
<p align="justify">For the estimation of the levels of recurrence if only chance was the driving force we performed the following simulation in which we only take C+G content into account. All other factors that may influence the probability of recurrence (e.g. replication time) did not match our definition of chance. For each cancer genome we randomly sampled the same number of SSMs as had been observed in the sample and also kept the counts for each of the six SSM subtypes the same. To take into account the C+G content of the human genome, random numbers were sampled for the C>A/G/T SSMs within the range of 1 to 1,144,530,852, which corresponds to the number of C/G bases in the GRCh37/h19 genome. Once a number had been selected it could not be selected again for the same cancer genome. The same was done for the T>A/C/G mutations, where we sampled numbers within the range of 1 to 1,716,796,279. Simulations were repeated 5,000 times and for each simulation we computed the recurrence overall, recurrence per SSM subtype and for each tumour type the recurrence ‘within tumour type’ and ‘pan-cancer’ (Fig STX1-1). Only for the recurrence within tumour type there were cases for which there were simulations with an equal or higher number of recurrent SSMs than observed. For three tumour types (Breast-DCIS, Cervix-AdenoCA and Myeloid-MDS) the observed number of recurrent SSMs was zero and nearly all simulated values were also zero (<0.5% were higher). For another five tumour types (Bone-Epith, Breast-LobularCA, Kidney-ChRCC, Myeloid-AML and SoftTissue-Leiomyo) between 2 and 186 of the 5,000 simulated values were equal or higher.</p>
  
